By early 1967, it was well known that the state
representative for the local legislative
district made up of Brazos, Grimes, and Madison
counties would not be a candidate for reelection.
He had moved out of the district and taken a job in
Baytown, Texas. Shortly after his announcement,
my oldest brother began to discuss with me the
possibilities of my making the race for state
representative. I had never given any thought at
all until he mentioned the possibility. He began
to explain to me the roles and duties of state
representative, how much time it took, et cetera.
The more I thought about it, the more interested I
became. I had campaigned for my cousin in 1962 and
had gotten a feel for what it was like to conduct a
campaign back in those days. I had not been able to
increase my farm operation to the point that it
occupied all of my time, so it did fit into the
scheme of things for me to think about making the
race. One of the things that I wanted to do was stay
on the payroll at Texas A&M as long as I could
because I needed the cash flow. So I decided to not
make an announcement until after the first of the
year since when I did make an announcement, I would
have to leave employment at Texas A&M. I checked on
the policy regulations of the A&M system and found
that once you announced for a public office, you
had to leave employment or resign your position.
So for that reason, I held off as long as I possibly
could. In the meantime, in November of that year, a
city councilman from Madisonville announced for
state representative, and he was way ahead of any
other announcements for the position. I did feel a
little pressure to let more and more people know
that I planned to run, but I did not want to get out
front too much simply because of the policy of the
inning system. In 1968, about mid-January, I
resigned my position at A&M and made my
announcement that I would be a candidate for state
representative. Shortly after making that
announcement, I was visited in my office by a
student who represented the Young Democrats. He
proceeded to interview me and ask a lot of
questions, mainly regarding my political
philosophy. And shortly after he left, it wasn't
too long until I had, there was another person
joined the race, the president of the Texas A&M
Young Democrats. He would become the liberal in
the race for state representatives. A fourth
candidate announced and filed just before the
filing deadline. He was a resident of Bryan and a
chiropractor.
So we had a dairy farmer, myself, a city councilman
from Madisonville, a young Democrat, and a
chiropractor in the race for state
representative. We all ran as Democrats because
there was very little
activity in the Republican Party at that time. In
fact, as I recall, there were less than 200 votes
cast that year in the Republican primary. The only
interest was in the statewide races, and
therefore,
Few votes were cast in that particular primary.
Quite a change from what we have today. One of the
things I felt like I needed to do early was to
establish a campaign office so that I had some
visibility in the city of Bryan, which was the
largest voting block in the district.
I was fortunate to locate a vacant office by a good
friend, Dr. Howard Cargill, who was a
veterinarian. He had built a new office next door
and vacated the space that I used as a campaign
office. This was on Texas Avenue and had great
visibility between Bryan and College Station.
there in the main thoroughfare. One of the things I
did in the office early on was to play around with
making some political science. I tried to make
them by hand but found out very quickly that that
was not very productive. In the meantime I learned
a little bit about silk screening and got some
friends together and we made some 4x8 signs that
were made with a silk screen. At that time, no one
had attempted to make sentinel signs, and no one
had put up a 4x8 sign on vacant property. But we
found these to be quite effective, particularly
since other candidates were not using them back in
1968. I really didn't know how I was going to get my
campaign started and what would be starting it,
but fortunately I had a visit with a bank president
and he told me that for the first time in history
their bank, which was also the place where I
banked, was going to get involved in politics.
They had decided to support me in my race, and this
would be the first time that they had ever
supported a candidate openly for any public
office. I was delighted because I knew the people
and had a high regard for all of the officers in that
particular bank.
One of the things that I suggested to the president
is that I needed a finance chairman and asked if his
executive vice president could serve in that
position. He said it would be strictly up to him and
I should ask him. I did ask the executive vice
president if he would be willing to serve and he
said yes. As soon as the word got out that he was
serving as my finance chairman, The competing
bank and the largest bank in the bank was not happy
at all and told me that I was making a big mistake and
that I needed to find someone else to serve as my
finance chairman. I was concerned about this and
didn't know which way to turn. So I finally decided
to go discuss it with the state senator at that time
lived in Brian and get his views. He had been in the
Senate for a long time and I felt like that at least
give me some advice on explaining the situation to
him. He related a story to me about people that are
person that had supported him that everyone said
that he would be better off if he did not campaign
for me. But he said, I decided a long time ago that if
somebody wanted to work for me, I was going to let
them, regardless of their character or whatever.
I did not have a problem with the character of the
individual. He was certainly one of the most
respected men in the town, and so that answered my
question. I went back and told the person that he
was still my finance chairman and that that was the
end of any discussion with regards to replacing
him as my finance chairman. Early in the campaign I
made two trips outside of my legislative
district. One was with my brother who lived in
Austin. and who took a day and went around to the
offices of those executive directors of trade
associations and some of the so-called lobbyists
in Austin. This was very productive. They had a lot
of contacts back in the district and traveled in
and out of the district and had a good ear for what
was going on and what might occur. In fact, one of
the lobbyists agreed to have a person on his staff
come into the district and find out what the
strategy might be of my opposition.
It developed from that swing through the district
that the assessment of the race was that I was
probably the leading candidate in the race, and my
principal opposition would be from the city
councilman from Madisonville, who had good
contacts into Brazos County and expected to carry
the other two counties. By that combination, I had
a chance of winning the race. Knowing this helped
some because I could plan some strategy and did not
want to depend strictly upon Braggers County to
win the race. On the other hand, I felt like that
Braggers County would be my strength, along with
getting a significant vote out of Grimes County. I
did not expect to carry Grimes County, but I knew I
had a lot of friends who were in the dairy business
in that county and thought I could depend on
getting a rather significant vote there. In the
meantime, some very good things happened. I had a
friend who lived down the street who was in the
labor movement and was able to help me not only try
to neutralize the small labor movement that that
was in Brazos County but also had access to the
minority community and was very helpful there in
getting me in touch and giving me good
recommendations with the minority leadership.
My father enjoyed campaigning and it turned out
that he also knew a lot of people in the minority
community because of his background of running a
country store where many of the minority families
had been sharecroppers on the land that my
grandfather owned. Of course, these were
children of those people that had sharecropped in
many cases, but they still remembered coming to
the store and my father's kindness toward them. I
knew from the outset that the young Democrat
candidate would be working the minorities very
vigorously and would be expected to get a good
vote. But I also wanted to make a showing in that
community as well as carrying the vote on the other
side of Texas. I knew that Madison County had to be
conceded to the local candidate who was a city
councilman and very popular in that county. The
biggest surprise to many in the first primary was
the vote that I got in Grimes County. I carried the
county along with Brazos County and liked only 67
votes winning over three candidates without a
runoff. This was a surprise to everyone as to the
strength that I showed. The runoff was a breeze
with that kind of lead, but I decided not to take it
for granted and continued work for the next three
weeks so that I would get a significant vote and
margin in the runoff election. This was the only
time in my 15 years in the legislature and eight
races that I had that I ever had to make a runoff.
This one was easy, but so many times runoffs are not
much fun because it's hard to get people back out to
the polls for the second time. As near as I could
determine, I spent about $3,500 on the race. This
was money that I didn't have with the exception of
about $1,600 that I cashed out of my retirement at
Texas A&M. Most of the balance I was able to raise
from small contributions locally through my
finance chairman and some contributions from the
lobby in Austin. I did come up $600 short for a bill
that I owed in Austin to a printing shop. And
fortunately,
some members of the lobby in Austin agreed to pick
up the tab on that. Back then, the finance laws for
financing campaigns was much more lenient and
much more flexible than they are today.
It never occurred to me that I might have to go into
debt during the campaign. If I had thought about
running up debt to make the race, I probably would
have decided not to run. Shortly after the runoff
election, I decided that I would see if I could go
back to work at Texas A&M at least for a few months
since I was no longer a candidate that had
opposition. I didn't know what the rules might be,
but I contacted
my cohort, who was the legislative person for the
A&M system, and asked him what the rules might be.
He said he could find no reason why that I could not
come back to work, particularly since my job
position was still open and the office of the
commandant. I assumed my old position in office
for about three days, and on the third day I got a
call to come to the President Rutter's office. I
phoned visiting the President Rutter. He
suggested that I moved to the budget office down
the hallway from his office, and that he would like
to switch me to a private payroll if that was okay
with him, with me. And I said that was certainly
fine. I had no problem with that at all. This was a,
turned out to be a fortunate
happening. because I was put on the payroll of the
Texas A&M Research Foundation. And years later,
when I was working at the Research Foundation and
subsequently resigned, I had just enough time to
invest in their particular retirement program.
During that six-month period that I was down the
hallway from President Rutter, I sat through the
budget reviews and in preparation for the
legislative session and was certainly an
education to me as to how the budget process works.
I also got a close-up of how President Rutter
conducted himself as president of the
institution and was quite impressed with a person
who showed great leadership ability. And I think
some of the traits that I found that he had made an
impression upon me and hope that they help me in my
decision-making later in my legislative years.
I'm sure that somewhere in the process that Mr.
Rutter had also indicated to the Speaker of the
House to me, Gus Mutcher, that it would be good if I
served on the Appropriations Committee. And
President Rutter made it a point to suggest to me
that I should ask for that committee. I did ask for
the committee and was one of the four freshmen
appointed to the committee when the session
convened in 1969. January 1969 was a memorable
experience as I joined the legislature and began
serving as a freshman state representative.
Gus Mutcher of Brenham was elected without
opposition as Speaker of the House. Previous to
his election, Ben Barnes had been Speaker, but had
since been elected Lieutenant Governor and had
moved over as Presiding Officer of the Texas
Senate.
Governor Preston Smith was the new Governor. So
all three of the principals, Mutcher, Barnes, and
Smith, were new in their jobs, just as I was. I spent
much of the session viewing budgets and reviewing
budgets and trying to assist with the Texas A&M
appropriations in any way that I could. I found
early that the process was quite different than
you might expect. The chairman of the House
Appropriations Committee was a very strong
individual. He had a very strong personality and
could be and had been
described as a dictator. I learned to appreciate
the man over a period of years that I served with him
and found that he was sometimes
very difficult, but I suspect that he was this way
to cover up a rather tender heart that he had
underneath. I carried a few bills that session,
but did have two that was of interest to Texas A&M.
One of the things we were trying to do in Brazos
County at the time was to find some land for
industrial development and bring in some
industry into the county. Up until that time, we
were very agriculturally oriented and had a
university that had a rather small enrollment at
that time.
President Rutter had suggested that property at
Bryan Air Force Base could be made available with
the legislature's approval. So we sought to get
legislative approval for the transfer exchange
of property that was under the control of Texas A&M
during the legislative session in 1969.
We were able to get legislation passed, but at the
last minute the bill was amended to exempt the main
campus. The reason that was put in the bill was to
avoid any attempt through political pressure of a
corporation building a hotel on the campus. There
was some discussion about a hotel being built on
the campus and the Board of Regents of the Texas A&M
University System did not want the pressure of
making that decision. The bill was amended to say
that you have to come back to the legislature to get
approval to build a building
by private enterprise on the main campus. Another
problem at that time was to develop more of an
airport facility than the county had. The city of
Bryan had a small airport, which was inadequate.
The primary facility was owned by Texas A&M
University. Texas A&M did not have the resources
to develop the airport as it should be, so after
looking at various possibilities and
alternatives, I introduced a bill that would
allow the county to create a an airport authority
and manage or control the airport at Eastwood, but
be under the management of Texas A&M. This would
allow public funds to be funneled to the airport
through the airport authority, which would have
taxing authority. The bill passed rather easily.
But when the election was held, it was defeated
rather resoundingly.
The problem the bill had was that it provided that
the airport authority could impose a tax of $0.50
on $100 evaluation, which was many times more
money than would ever be required to operate an
airport.
The bill has never been amended, but it's still on
the books and does provide that possibility
sometime in the future. But because it lost so
badly, when it was first initiated back in 1969, it
has never been used as a vehicle to develop the
airport facility here in Brazos County, which is
still to this day needed and could be a great boon to
economic development. There were a number of
other issues that come to mind that were before the
legislature in 1969. One of the early votes taken
was on creation of University of Texas at Dallas.
Until that time, that campus had been a private
research institute, and the vote would make it a
part of the University of Texas system. I had been
privately advised by a Dallasite that this was not
a good concept and would end up costing the state
considerably, and so I voted against it. There
were only 19 votes cast against the proposal, and I
found out very quickly that the Dallas delegation
could be pretty intimidating.
I never did know of them to carry out any threats,
but there were certainly threats made after I cast
that vote, even though it was overwhelmingly
passed in the House. Another bill that the speaker
was particularly interested in passing was
liquor by the drink. And I had taken a position
against liquor by the drink during the campaign in
1968 and was not about to change my position.
However, the pressure from the speaker can be
rather significant. But I found later that we may
have become good friends because of standing up to
that pressure. You never know. I'm sure that at the
time the vote was cast, he was delighted to have my
vote. But on the other hand, there are many times,
as always true in the legislature and serving in
the legislature, there's always a tomorrow. And
there were a lot of tomorrows in dealing with this
speaker who I developed a rather good
relationship with. In a special session
later that year, there was a bill to create a
private insurance in lieu of the federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation, the FDIC. This bill
became known as one of the Sharkstown bills. It
passed without little opposition at the time and
reached the governor's desk and was vetoed. Even
though the bill was vetoed, a great deal was made of
the Sharkstown bills, a lot of a little later, in
fact, at the beginning of the next session, and
created the Sharpstown scandal, which I will
discuss later. Another issue that occupied a
great deal of my time in the interim was a proposal
by a colleague to create a school of oceanography
at the University of Houston. I was not aware of
this, but at that time, Texas A&M was producing
almost 50% of all of the oceanography PhDs in the
world. And there was no undergraduate school of
oceanography with the exception of one in the
state of Washington in the entire nation. The
administration at Texas A&M felt like that it was
not called for and that it would be inappropriate
to have a school of oceanography anywhere except
at the graduate level. And we were already turning
out more than our share of oceanographers here at
Texas A&M. And the state did not need another
school of oceanography anywhere. It also turned
out that the author of the bill was close to my
cousin who had run for lieutenant governor and had
become a political influence in Parrish County
even though he had been defeated. And I recall his
coming to Austin and telling the state
representative in no uncertain terms that he was
not to push that bell, just let it drop. He did let
the bell drop but was interested in pursuing it
during the interim and got an interim committee
appointed and I got appointed as one of the
committee members to study in more detail what was
needed in the area of oceanography and marine
studies. This led to some very interesting trips
that were made to oceanographic institutes such
as Scripps, Woods Hole, the University of
Washington where they had the only undergraduate
school of oceanography, and several other stops
along the way. I think that after the visits it
became clear that we had no particular need for
expanding the educational programs in Texas with
regards to oceanography, but did need to do
something with the large to research along the
coast. This led to...